OSDOCS-14862 NETOBSERV 1.9 Features, Bugs, Known Issues (#94440)
openshift/openshift-docs: observability/network_observability/network-observability-operator-release-notes.adoc

==== User-defined networks with Network Observability
With this release, the user-defined networks (UDN) feature is generally available with Network Observability. When the `UDNMapping` feature is enabled in Network Observability, the *Traffic* flow table has a `UDN labels` column. You can filter on *Source Network Name* and *Destination Network Name*.

[id="filter-flowlogs-at-ingestion_{context}"]
==== Filter flowlogs at ingestion
With this release, you can create filters to reduce the number of generated network flows and the resource usage of Network Observability components.

You can configure the following filters:

* eBPF Agent filters
* Flowlogs-pipeline filters

[id="ipsec-support_{context}"]
==== IPsec support
With this update, when IPsec is enabled on {product-title}:

* A new column named *IPsec Status* is displayed in the Network Observability *Traffic* flows view to show whether a flow was successfully IPsec-encrypted or if there was an error during encryption/decryption.

* A new dashboard showing the percentage of encrypted traffic is generated.

[id="network-observability-cli-1-9_{context}"]
==== Network Observability CLI

> New filtering options available with packets, flows, and metrics capture:

Reviewer: Same thing here: 

```suggestion
The following filtering options are now available for packets, flows, and metrics capture:
```

> * Track IPsec using `--enable_ipsec`

Reviewer: I wonder how this would look if you reformatted to something like

```suggestion
`--enable_ipsec`:: Tracks IPsec metrics 
```

Technically this is how you'd do definition lists (https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=format-lists), but I don't what you've written is 100% a _definition list_. Just a thought.

* Value that determines the ratio of packets being sampled using `--sampling`
* Filter flows using a custom query using `--query`
* A comma separated list of interfaces to monitor using `--interfaces`
* A comma separated list of interfaces to exclude using `--exclude_interfaces`
* A comma separated list of metric names to generate using `--include_list`

For more information, see xref:../../observability/network_observability/netobserv_cli/netobserv-cli-reference.adoc#network-observability-netobserv-cli-reference_netobserv-cli-reference[Network Observability CLI reference].

[id="notable-technical-changes-1-9_{context}"]
=== Notable technical changes

> * The `NetworkEvents` feature in Network Observability 1.9 has been updated to work with the newer Linux kernel of {product-title} 4.19. This update breaks compatibility with older kernels. As a result, the `NetworkEvents` feature can only be used with {product-title} 4.19. If you are using this feature with Network Observability 1.8 and {product-title} 4.18, consider avoiding a Network Observability upgrade or upgrading both Network Observability 1.9 and {product-title} 4.19.

Reviewer: Small wording suggestion: 

```suggestion
* The `NetworkEvents` feature in Network Observability 1.9 has been updated to work with the newer Linux kernel of {product-title} 4.19. This update breaks compatibility with older kernels. As a result, the `NetworkEvents` feature can only be used with {product-title} 4.19. If you are using this feature with Network Observability 1.8 and {product-title} 4.18, consider avoiding a Network Observability upgrade or upgrading Network Observability to 1.9 and {product-title} to 4.19. 
```

[id="network-observability-technology-preview-1-9_{context}"]
=== Technology Preview features
Some features in this release are currently in Technology Preview. These experimental features are not intended for production use. Note the following scope of support on the Red Hat Customer Portal for these features:

link:https://access.redhat.com/support/offerings/techpreview[Technology Preview Features Support Scope]

[id="ebpf-manager-operator-with-network-observability_{context}"]
==== eBPF Manager Operator with Network Observability

:FeatureName: eBPF Manager Operator with Network Observability
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

The eBPF Manager Operator reduces the attack surface and ensures compliance, security, and conflict prevention by managing all eBPF programs. Network observability can use the eBPF Manager Operator to load hooks. This eliminates the need to provide the eBPF Agent with privileged mode or additional Linux capabilities like `CAP_BPF` and `CAP_PERFMON`. The eBPF Manager Operator with network observability is only supported on 64-bit AMD architecture.

[id="network-observability-operator-CVE-1-9_{context}"]
=== CVE

> * Link:https://access.redhat.com/security/cve/CVE-2025-26791[CVE-2025-26791]

Reviewer: This one doesn't render correctly in the preview. Might be because it's capitalized here (Link). ptal https://94440--ocpdocs-pr.netlify.app/openshift-enterprise/latest/observability/network_observability/network-observability-operator-release-notes.html#network-observability-operator-CVE-1-9_network-observability-operator-release-notes-v1-9

Note that the rest of your bugs are in asterisks so I'd also put this one in asterisks.

[id="network-observability-operator-1-9-bug-fixes_{context}"]
=== Bug fixes
* Previously, when filtering by source or destination IP from the console plugin, using a Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation such as `10.128.0.0/24` did not work, returning results that should be filtered out. With this update, it is now possible to use a CIDR notation, with the results being filtered as expected. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2276[*NETOBSERV-2276*])

> * Previously, network flows may have incorrectly identified the network interfaces in use, especially with a risk of mixing up `eth0` and `ens5`. This issue only occurred when the eBPF agents were configured as `Privileged`. With this update, it has been fixed partially, and almost all network interfaces are correctly identified. Refer to the known issues below for more details. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2257[*NETOBSERV-2257*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Previously, network flows might have incorrectly identified the network interfaces in use, especially with a risk of mixing up `eth0` and `ens5`. This issue only occurred when the eBPF agents were configured as `Privileged`. With this update, it has been fixed partially, and almost all network interfaces are correctly identified. Refer to the known issues below for more details. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2257[*NETOBSERV-2257*])
```

> * Previously, when the Operator checked for available Kubernetes APIs in order to adapt its behavior, if there was a stale API, this resulted in an error that prevented the Operator from starting normally. With this update, the Operator will ignore errors on unrelated APIs, will log errors on related APIs, and will continue to run normally. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2240[*NETOBSERV-2240*])

Reviewer: General rule is to stay away from "will" and just use present tense: 

```suggestion
* Previously, when the Operator checked for available Kubernetes APIs in order to adapt its behavior, if there was a stale API, this resulted in an error that prevented the Operator from starting normally. With this update, the Operator ignores error on unrelated APIs, logs errors on related APIs, and continues to run normally. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2240[*NETOBSERV-2240*])
```

> * Previously, users could not sort flows by *Bytes* or *Packets* in the *Traffic* flows view of the Console plugin. With this update, users can sort flows as expected.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2239[*NETOBSERV-2239*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Previously, users could not sort flows by *Bytes* or *Packets* in the *Traffic* flows view of the Console plugin. With this update, users can sort flows by *Bytes* and *Packets*.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2239[*NETOBSERV-2239*])
```

* Previously, it was not obvious to figure out there was an issue when referencing a `LokiStack` from the `FlowCollector` resource, such as in case of typing error. With this update, the `FlowCollector` status clearly states that the referenced `LokiStack` is not found in that case. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2174[*NETOBSERV-2174*])

* Previously, in the console plugin *Traffic flows* view, in case of text overflow, text ellipsis sometimes hid much of the text to be displayed. With this update, it displays as much text as possible. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2119[*NETOBSERV-2119*])

* Previously, the console plugin for Network Observability 1.8.1 and earlier did not work with the {product-title} 4.19 web console, making the *Network Traffic* page inaccessible. With this update, the console plugin is compatible and the *Network Traffic* page is accessible in Network Observability 1.9.0. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2046[*NETOBSERV-2046*])

> * Previously, when using conversation tracking (`logTypes: Conversations` or `logTypes: All` in the `FlowCollector` resource), the *Traffic* rates metrics visible in the dashboards were flawed, wrongly showing an seemingly out-of-control increase in traffic. Now, the metrics show more accurate traffic rates. However, note that in `Conversations` and `EndedConversations` modes, these metrics are still not 100% accurate as they don't include long-standing connections. This information has been added to the documentation. The default mode `logTypes: Flows`, is recommended to avoid this kind of inaccuracy. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1955[*NETOBSERV-1955*])

Reviewer: Is seemingly necessarily? If so, s/ an/a. If not, I suggest removing it. 
```suggestion
* Previously, when using conversation tracking (`logTypes: Conversations` or `logTypes: All` in the `FlowCollector` resource), the *Traffic* rates metrics visible in the dashboards were flawed, wrongly showing an out-of-control increase in traffic. Now, the metrics show more accurate traffic rates. However, note that in `Conversations` and `EndedConversations` modes, these metrics are still not 100% accurate as they don't include long-standing connections. This information has been added to the documentation. The default mode `logTypes: Flows`, is recommended to avoid this kind of inaccuracy. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1955[*NETOBSERV-1955*])
```

* Previously, some of the warnings sent from the Operator validation webhook could lack clarity, such as when not mentioning exactly which feature causes the warning, or what needed to be done. With this update, some of these messages have been reviewed and amended to make them more actionable. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2178[*NETOBSERV-2178*])

* Previously, it was not obvious to figure out there was an issue when referencing a `LokiStack` from the `FlowCollector` resource, such as in case of typing error. With this update, the `FlowCollector` status clearly states that the referenced `LokiStack` is not found in that case. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2174[*NETOBSERV-2174*])

* Previously, in the console plugin *Traffic flows* view, in case of text overflow, text ellipsis sometimes hid much of the text to be displayed. With this update, it displays as much text as possible. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2119[*NETOBSERV-2119*])

> * Previously, the console plugin for Network Observability 1.8.1 and earlier did not work with the {product-title} 4.19 web console, making the *Network Traffic* page inaccessible. With this update, the console plugin is compatible and the *Network Traffic* page is accessible for Network Observability 1.8.1 and earlier. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2046[*NETOBSERV-2046*])

Reviewer 2: There is no backward fix for 1.8.1 and earlier, it's only with 1.9 that the 4.19 console integration is restored

```suggestion
* Previously, the console plugin for Network Observability 1.8.1 and earlier did not work with the {product-title} 4.19 web console, making the *Network Traffic* page inaccessible. With this update, the console plugin is compatible and the *Network Traffic* page is accessible in Network Observability 1.9.0. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2046[*NETOBSERV-2046*])
```

* Previously, the console plugin for Network Observability 1.8.1 and earlier did not work with the {product-title} 4.19 web console, making the *Network Traffic* page inaccessible. With this update, the console plugin is compatible and the *Network Traffic* page is accessible in Network Observability 1.9.0. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2046[*NETOBSERV-2046*])

* Previously, when using conversation tracking (`logTypes: Conversations` or `logTypes: All` in the `FlowCollector` resource), the *Traffic* rates metrics visible in the dashboards were flawed, wrongly showing an seemingly out-of-control increase in traffic. Now, the metrics show more accurate traffic rates. However, note that in `Conversations` and `EndedConversations` modes, these metrics are still not 100% accurate as they don't include long-standing connections. This information has been added to the documentation. The default mode `logTypes: Flows`, is recommended to avoid this kind of inaccuracy. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1955[*NETOBSERV-1955*])

[id="network-observability-operator-1-9-known-issues_{context}"]
=== Known issues

> * Currently, the user-defined network (UDN) feature shows a configuration issue and a warning when using with {product-title} 4.18 even though it is supported on {product-title} 4.18. There is currently no workaround for this issue. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2305[*NETOBSERV-2305*])

Reviewer 2: yes, the "workaround" would be to just ignore the warning as it's harmless

* Previously, when using conversation tracking (`logTypes: Conversations` or `logTypes: All` in the `FlowCollector` resource), the *Traffic* rates metrics visible in the dashboards were flawed, wrongly showing an seemingly out-of-control increase in traffic. Now, the metrics show more accurate traffic rates. However, note that in `Conversations` and `EndedConversations` modes, these metrics are still not 100% accurate as they don't include long-standing connections. This information has been added to the documentation. The default mode `logTypes: Flows`, is recommended to avoid this kind of inaccuracy. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1955[*NETOBSERV-1955*])

[id="network-observability-operator-1-9-known-issues_{context}"]
=== Known issues
* In some rare cases, the eBPF agent is unable to appropriately correlate flows with the involved interfaces when running in privileged modes with several network namespaces. A large part of these issues have been identified and resolved in this release, but some inconsistencies remain, especially with the `ens5` interface. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-2287[*NETOBSERV-2287*])

> * eBPF pods of Network Observability are stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state on ARM clusters when running with the eBPF Manager feature enabled. No workaround is currently available. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-58096[*OCPBUGS-58096*])

Reviewer 3: Actually, since we already have L82 mention `The eBPF Manager Operator with network observability is only supported on 64-bit AMD architecture.` I dont think we need this bug mentioned at all

* xref:../../observability/network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-user-defined-networks_nw-observe-network-traffic[User-defined networks]
* xref:../../observability/network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-working-with-udn_nw-observe-network-traffic[Working with user-defined networks]

[id="filter-flowlogs-at-ingestion_{context}"]
==== Filter flowlogs at ingestion
With this release, you can create filters to reduce the number of generated network flows and the resource usage of Network Observability components.

You can configure the following two different kinds of filters:

* eBPF agent filters
* Flowlogs-pipeline filters

For more information, see xref:../../observability/network_observability/configuring-operator.adoc#network-observability-filter-network-flows-at-ingestion_network_observability[Filter network flows at ingestion]

[id="multiple-rules-with-ebpf-flow-filter-rule_{context}"]
==== Multiple rules with eBPF flow filter rule
This enhancement lets you configure the `FlowCollector` custom resource to filter eBPF flows using multiple rules to control the flow of packets cached in the eBPF flow table.

> For more information, see xref:../../observability/network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-filtering-ebpf-rule_nw-observe-network-traffic[Filtering eBPF flow data using multiple rules]

Reviewer 4: Isn't that part of the eBPF agent filters mentionned above ? 

cc @jotak

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

[id="ipsec-support_{context}"]
==== IPsec support
With this update, when IPsec is enabled on {product-title}:

* A new column named *IPsec Status* is displayed in the network observability *Traffic* flows view to show whether a flow was successfully IPsec-encrypted or if there was an error during encryption/decryption.

* You can measure traffic between nodes, excluding inner traffic, and view the percentage of encrypted traffic.

//For more information, see: xref:../../observability/network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-ipsec_nw-observe-network-traffic[Working with IPsec]
//PR 93858 has not yet been merged as of 06/12/2025

[id="network-observability-cli-1-9_{context}"]
==== Network Observability CLI

The following new features, options, and filters are added to the Network Observability CLI for this release:

> 
> * <insert list if applicable for 1.9>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

* A new column named *IPsec Status* is displayed in the Network Observability *Traffic* flows view to show whether a flow was successfully IPsec-encrypted or if there was an error during encryption/decryption.

* A new dashboard showing the percentage of encrypted traffic is generated.

[id="network-observability-cli-1-9_{context}"]
==== Network Observability CLI
New filtering options available with packets, flows, and metrics capture:

* Track IPsec using `--enable_ipsec`
* Value that determines the ratio of packets being sampled using `--sampling`
* Filter flows using a custom query using `--query`
* A comma separated list of interfaces to monitor using `--interfaces`
* A comma separated list of interfaces to exclude using `--exclude_interfaces`
* A comma separated list of metric names to generate using `--include_list`

For more information, see xref:../../observability/network_observability/netobserv_cli/netobserv-cli-reference.adoc#network-observability-netobserv-cli-reference_netobserv-cli-reference[Network Observability CLI reference].

[id="notable-technical-change-1-9_{context}"]
=== Notable technical change
//https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSDOCS-13236

> This update includes a new Kernel version in {product-title} 4.19. Consequently, only Network Observability 1.9 is compatible with {product-title} 4.19's OVN Observability. Older versions of Network Observability are not supported and will cause Network Events to fail. For example, OpenShift 4.18 is compatible with the Technology Preview of Network Events in Network Observability 1.8.

Reviewer 2: How about something like that:

The `NetworkEvents`  feature in Network Observability 1.9 has been updated to work with the newer Linux kernel of {product-title} 4.19, which breaks the compatibility with older kernels. As a result, the `NetworkEvents`  feature can only be used with {product-title} 4.19. If you were using this feature in Network Observability 1.8 with {product-title} 4.18, you may prefer to avoid upgrading Network Observability, or upgrade to both Network Observability 1.9 and {product-title} 4.19.

[id="network-observability-technology-preview-1-9_{context}"]
=== Technology Preview features
Some features in this release are currently in Technology Preview. These experimental features are not intended for production use. Note the following scope of support on the Red Hat Customer Portal for these features:

link:https://access.redhat.com/support/offerings/techpreview[Technology Preview Features Support Scope]

[id="ebpf-manager-operator-with-network-observability_{context}"]
==== eBPF Manager Operator with Network Observability

:FeatureName: eBPF Manager Operator with Network Observability
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

> The eBPF Manager Operator reduces the attack surface and ensures compliance, security, and conflict prevention by managing all eBPF programs. Network observability can use the eBPF Manager Operator to load hooks. This eliminates the need to provide the eBPF Agent with privileged mode or additional Linux capabilities like `CAP_BPF` and `CAP_PERFMON`. The eBPF Manager Operator with network observability is only supported on 64-bit AMD architecture.

Reviewer 3: This should be addresses before merge
